clarify support for VirtualService in waypoints (#16670)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ambient/usage/l7-features/index.md

test: no
---

By adding a waypoint proxy to your traffic flow you can enable more of [Istio's features](/docs/concepts). Waypoints are configured using {{< gloss "gateway api" >}}Gateway API{{< /gloss >}}.

{{< warning >}}

> The VirtualService and EnvoyFilter APIs are not supported in waypoints. [Read more below](#unsupported-apis).

Reviewer: A note, the wording of the warning was that desired by TOC, so I'm not sure we want to change this without running it by them. It was one I inserted after a TOC meeting after confirming the wording with them.

Author: The expository paragraph has moved to line 166.

|  Name  | Feature Status | Attachment |
| --- | --- | --- |
| [`HTTPRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/http-routing/) | Stable | `parentRefs` |
| [`GRPCRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/grpc-routing/) | Stable | `parentRefs` |
| [`TLSRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls) | Alpha | `parentRefs` |
| [`TCPRoute`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tcp/) | Alpha | `parentRefs` |

> (TLS and TCP routing are stable features in Istio, but support for these objects remains at Alpha because the Gateway API objects are still in the experimental channel.)

Reviewer 2: That's tough, so there is no stable way of managing tcp traffic in ambient.

Reviewer 3: Yep - and it's really because Gateway API is (rightly) hesitant about pushing those APIs forward without implementations that are championing those use-case.

      port: 9080
      weight: 10
{{< /text >}}

## Unsupported APIs with waypoints

> Some legacy Istio APIs are deliberately not supported by waypoints in ambient mode.  These APIs can still be used with [Istio Gateways](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/).

Reviewer 3: Should we call out that these APIs can be used with Istio Gateways even if they're instantiated with Gateway API?

Author: that's exactly the problem - if we insert the word "Classic" to this sentence it becomes clear that Istio Gateways cannot be instantiated with Gateway API :)

### VirtualService

> Istio's legacy traffic routing API is not supported for configuring waypoint traffic routing, though it works in some circumstances.

Author: Switched to "classic" for the short term.

Any use of VirtualService with waypoints is considered Alpha, and may be subject to change in future releases.
Istio's maintainers do not intend to remove this support, but will not be progressing it to [any further feature phase](/docs/releases/feature-stages).

#### Migrating from VirtualService to Gateway API routes

[Only a single VirtualService](/docs/reference/config/analysis/ist0109/) can be used for mesh traffic matching a certain hostname. However, multiple Gateway API routes can refer to the same host.

> This is especially relevant when you are migrating from VirtualService to Gateway API routes. If you create one or more HTTPRoutes which specify a Service that is also in use with a VirtualService, the HTTPRoute/s will apply and the VirtualService will not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is especially relevant when you are migrating from `VirtualService` to Gateway API routes. If you create one or more `HTTPRoute` resources which specify a `Service` that is also in use with a `VirtualService`, the `HTTPRoute` will apply and the `VirtualService` will not.
```

> To avoid this situation, users migrating from sidecars should look to convert their VirtualService configuration to Gateway API routes. The [ingress2gateway](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ingress2gateway/) project has limited support for this use case. Caution is advised, especially for users who use [subset routing](/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#destination-rules)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid this situation, users migrating from sidecars should look to convert their `VirtualService` configuration to Gateway API routes. The [ingress2gateway](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/ingress2gateway/) project has limited support for this use case. Caution is advised, especially for users who use [subset routing](/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#destination-rules)
```

#### Using features that are not in Gateway API

A small number of Istio's features cannot currently be expressed in Gateway API: for example, [fault injection](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/fault-injection/) and [direct response](/docs/reference/config/networking/virtual-service/#HTTPDirectResponse). It is technically possible to use VirtualService for these use cases, as long as the configured `hosts` do not conflict with the `parentRefs` of any Gateway API route as mentioned above.

#### DestinationRule subsets

Gateway API has no ability to address [subsets](/docs/reference/config/networking/destination-rule/#Subset). Instead, you must define additional Services which have a more granular selector than the original.

> The other features of DestinationRule are supported.

Reviewer 3: exportTo is also not supported, but I think @Stevenjin8's PR covers that?

Author: Is `workloadSelector` supported? 
If not we could basically say "only `trafficPolicy` is supported"

Author: https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/51085/ isn't clear, so I'm guessing it does work

> #### Legacy Istio gateways

Reviewer 3: Do we really want to introduce the legacy word here?

> Istio Gateways configured with VirtualService (i.e. where the `gateways` field refers to a named ingress gateway) can safely be mixed with waypoints which are configured with Gateway API routes.

Reviewer 3: I think this is what "mixed" means? Better to remove ambiguity IMO
```suggestion
Istio Gateways configured with VirtualService (i.e. where the `gateways` field refers to a named ingress gateway) can safely be deployed in the same cluster with waypoints which are configured with Gateway API routes.
```

### EnvoyFilter

> EnvoyFilter is Istio's break-glass API for advanced configuration of Envoy proxies. Please note that **EnvoyFilter is not currently supported for any existing Istio version with waypoint proxies**. While it may be possible to use EnvoyFilter with waypoints in limited scenarios, its use is not supported, and is actively discouraged by the maintainers. The alpha API may break in future releases as it evolves. We expect official support will be provided at a later date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `EnvoyFilter`

`EnvoyFilter` is Istio's break-glass API for advanced configuration of Envoy proxies. Please note that EnvoyFilter is not currently supported for any existing Istio version with waypoint proxies. While it may be possible to use `EnvoyFilter` with waypoints in limited scenarios, its use is not supported, and is actively discouraged by the maintainers. The alpha API may break in future releases as it evolves. We expect official support will be provided at a later date.
```
